# An Ethics

## At the beginning of a new adventure

Today I officially commited to the University of California, San Francisco. It's been more than a year since I began writing my applications. When I started, I was worried about the MCAT, keeping my relationship afloat, and submitting a poster to the Society for Neuroscience conference. Now, I am in a new research area, in a new relationship, and soon to be in a new city.

Before looking forward, I'd like to look back on my journey. 

### Postmortem on the applications
It's very difficult to assess what worked and what didn't work in my application. The process is too dependent on the reader or sub-committee. Overall, my academic performance was clearly up to par for all of the schools. I had a diverse set of interests and pursued them with depth, and my research experiences were substantial. From the deliverable standpoint, I don't think I lacked anything specific. However, I do feel that I did not do a good job of assessing my fit at different institutions. And by this, I mean doing in depth research on the program to identify key parts of my application and narrative that would resonate well with the program.

- Personal Statement
  - I wrote about the transition from an inward focus to an outward focus. Instead of focusing on achievement and growth, which are perfectly fine to focus on, I really shone when thinking about the other people around me and improving their well-being. 
  - The examples were honest but disjoint. Spain -> Stanford -> Neuroscience -> Amygdala -> CU@Home... Chronologically it makes sense, but thematically it's all over the place.
  - A better essay, in general, would be to talk about flow. "Let things flow naturally forward in whatever way they like" Lao Tzu. In high school, my senior quote was "I am the master of my soul; I am the captain of my fate" from Invictus. My journey is more a reflection of self-driven purpose, yes, but also one of asserting control. Really, once I let go of my plans and ambitions for myself, I realized there was so much to learn. If I blinked, I'd miss the brilliance of those around me. The place in which I made this realization ended up being where I came back to, naturally because I was swept there by the sauntering river of my heart.
- Research Supplement
  - This is where the bulk of my mistakes were made. My project eventually became something worth discussing, but I didn't think of it at the time. Once I had understood the bigger implications of my work, the actual research and hypothesis testing became much more interesting.
  - I was too reliant on what Daniel told me about the research. Had I kept pushing it further, I would have learned on my own. At the same time, I learned this about the same time that everyone else did. From that perspective, I did the best that I could and I was simply at the mercy of bad luck.
- Extracurriculars
  - From my interviews, it seemed that the podcast and my sexual harrasment work was of most interest to those that bothered to read my application.
- Interviews
  - Johns Hopkins: Very surprised that no one had read my application. My impression is that I did not make it clear how I planned to study pathology. My research appealed to Chris Fetsch, and my interview with a member of the MSTP committee went well because I was well read and articulate, but I think it was clear I hadn't thought a lot about how a PhD fit with the MD.
  - Harvard: This one was weird. I think I wasn't able to impress the director, who asked me how I managed my time out of school. I think the in person interviews were good, but again, not really a strong sense of what I wanted to do as an MD.
  - WashU: My impressions were that I interviewed well with my individual interviewers, but I botched the committee interview. I did not address their questions respectfully and did a poor job of describing the research.
  - UCSF: Interviewed very well with the MD program, but had a similar problem to Hopkins in which my research wasn't conveyed in an appealing, basic science approach.
  - Tri-I: Interviewed very well with everyone I spoke to.
  - UCLA/CalTech: Interviewed well with UCLA, less so with Caltech. The director interview was dry and a bit sleepy.
  - Mt. Sinai: Interviewed well with all my interviewers.
  - Yale: Oddly my best interview. Was able to describe myself as a devil-jaguar.
  
Overall, I struggled in this cycle mainly because I was not able to articulate my research well enough. What a surprise! My strenghts really came out when discussing things other than research. So how have I changed my pursuits to address these concerns?

In short, I haven't and I have. While trying to decide between schools, I thought very deeply about the programs. What made them different? What led to different outcomes in the student experience? What was the added value of each institution? By collecting a massive amount of information, my intuitions about each place became deeper and I saw a lot of what I could have capitalized on during the cycle. By trying to have a more clear picture of my path, guided by information about the future and outcomes, I have reoriented myself naturally.

### Looking forward
The career path of a physician=scientist is arduous. By the time you are out of school, you are 30 (or older) and ready to begin an tasking internship with plenty of younger, equally driven and ambitious colleagues. Should you pursue the MD only, you will be primed with youth and time to take on a challenging career in medicine. A PhD only approach could notch you an tenure-track position by the same age (with some luck). So really, what is the additional value of the MD-PhD?

Dr. Treisman, an AIDS Psychiatrist at Hopkins, used the word synthetically, but I think a better term is synergy. When the MD and the PhD come together, not just additively but multiplicatively, then it makes the time-cost worth it. And what does that look like? For example, you could consider an oncologist who studies cancer metabolism and can receive tumor samples from his patients. Or perhaps even a neurosurgeon who designs cognitive tasks for patients and records from electrodes in their brains.

I think what in the end was missing from my application was depth in thought in this regard. How would my research interact with my practice? How fine grained have I considered this interaction? Depth of thought is a key feature of a good scientist; and in this endeavor, I failed.

However, when faced with the prospects of my future, I was compelled to think deeply. Whether it was the fear of missing out or the desire to do better in the next phase of my life, I thought very deeply. That depth of thought led me to conclusions I had completley missed before, and would have greatly benefited from in applying. The main goals for myself I would like to state here. Instead of labeling discrete, realizable goals at first, I would like to describe how I would like to conduct myself, what it is I would like to strive to do every single day. An ethics, if you will.

- Be involved in knowledge creation
  - This can look like a lot of things.
  - Professor at a research university.
  - Team leader at a biotech company.
  - Physician collaborating with either of the above.
- Advocate for patients and members of my community
  - Policy
  - Volunteering
- Never be bored!
  - Taking on adventure!
  - Being uncomfortable :) 
- Be a good friend.
  
When thinking about my goals in these terms, it becomes a lot easier to know what I should get involved with. The research that I have found most interesting and aligned my clinical and intellectual interests is strong at UCSF. Their study of human brain development is exactly what I would like to learn about as an aspiring child neurologist or neurosurgeon. Policy-wise, I would like to get involved with the mental health task force that is being run by the mayor's office in San Francisco. In my free time, I want to blog and work on learning more math that I can then incorporate into machine learning models. In particular, I've always been interested in studying game theory. Creating RL agents could be a fun way of rethinking how two agents interact with one another. I also should take the time to reach out to my friends as often as I can, and make that a priority over the week. And finally, I want to always be thinking about another trip or adventure that could change the way that I think. Never say no (thanks Eli).
  
My goals are described by the way I want to live my life, and therefore constitute an ethics. The pragmatist and scientist in me needs to think deeply about the opportunities in which I am best suited to pursue those goals, to place myself in a position to do those things. I hope to each day think about how I am working towards those pursuits, and by pushing myself to avoid pitfalls of laziness and procrastination, be who I am meant to be.
 
  
  
  

